---
layout: post
title: List of Github projects
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). Aug 20, 2009 - Montevideo

h2. Small description of items im following
*hnn
Haskell Neural Network
*jsvars
Add javascript variables and objects to rails projects without ugly js-erb stuffed in views. 
*validatious-on-rails
Rails plugin that maps model validations to class names on form elements to integrate with validatious
*chef-deploy
A gem that provides resources and providers for deploying ruby web apps from chef recipes
*trapeze-rb
Ruby Bindings for the Trapeze AMQP Router and Load Balancer
*hurl
A web-app that makes http request and stores them in redis.
*devise
Flexible authentication solution for Rails with Warden
*suspedners
startup app with factorygirl and shoulda
*loli 
simpel dsl for haskell web apps
*swfupload_fu
SWFUpload is a small JavaScript/Flash library to get the best of both worlds. It features the great upload capabilities of Flash and the accessibility and ease of HTML/CSS.
*reia
A ruby/python language for the Erlang VM
* Fast_context
Fast Shoulda and Factory Girl tests
* GitSharp
A clone of git mad in .net
* Hubris
Bridge ruby-haskell 
* Active Merchant
simple payment abstraction library used in and sponsered by shopify
* Arel
A Relational Algebra for Ruby
* asi-http-request
Easy to use CFNetwork wrapper for HTTP requests, Objective-C, Mac OS X and iPhone
* Braid
Braid is a simple tool to help track git and svn vendor branches in a git repository.
* clockingit
Project Management, Collaboration and Time Tracking. Some additional features are implemented here compared to the original source
* communityengine
Adds basic social networking capabilities to your existing application, including users, blogs, photos, clippings, favorites, and more
* dm-gvideo-adapter
DataMapper adapter for google video
* Hemlock
Framework for building multi-user, real-time web applications
* homebrew
Packaging system for Mac OS X 10.5 and above; heavy optimisations, no redundant packages and a bonus beer theme
* i18n_demo_app
Demo application to show Rails' new i18n features
* lncater
Clojure-based, R-like statistical computing and graphics environment for the JVM
* integrity
foca continuos integration server
* mg 
minimal gem way to build minimal gem
* ponghaskell
* radiant
Radiant is a no-fluff, open source content management system designed for small teams.
* spawn
A ridiculously simple fixtures replacement for your web framework of choice.
* tog_social
Tog Platform Social Component  
* whenever
Provides clean ruby syntax for defining messy cron jobs and running them Whenever.
