This paper by Montemerlo et al. describes a novel idea to reduce time complexity of the SLAM algorithm. It builds on top of the Rao-Blackwell theorem to improve and factorize particle filters. This idea lets us factor the probabilities of the SLAM posterior into low dimensional estimation problems. The naive implementation of FastSLAM runs then in O(NM) time where N is the number of particles and M is the number of map features.

In previous papers SLAM implementations were based in the use of Extended Kalman Filters (EKFs). The problem with EKFs is that updates require O(K)^2 time (where K is the number of landmarks) to compute making the total algorithm  cubic in time. The key idea to understand FastSLAM is that knowledge of the robot's path renders the landmark measurements independent. We can the decompose the SLAM problem into a localization problem, and a collection of landmark estimations problems.

FastSLAM uses a modified particle filter for estimating the posterior over robot paths. Each particle posses K Kalman filters that estimate the K landmark locations conditioned on the path estimate.  The posterior after this factorization is shown in the image below :





This image means that the problem can be decomposed into K+1 estimation problems. One problem estimating a posterior over robot paths, and  K problems of estimating locations of K landmarks conditioned on the path estimate.

The steps for computing these problems are displayed in the image below:

It is a three step process. 1) Particle Filter estimation 2) Landmark Location Estimation 3) Calculating the importance weights.

For PF estimation FastSLAM uses a filter that is similar to the Monte Carlo Localization. At each point in time these algorithms maintain a set  of particles representing the posterior. This is almost the same method seen in class.

Landmark Localization estimate is done as mentioned above using Kalman Filters. We maintain and update for each particle the mean and the co-variance for each particle for each landmark.

Finally the importance weighting is given by the ratio of the target and proposal in each particle as below 
